Cover:   Colpophyllia natans   (boulder brain coral) with multifocal and basal tissue loss exposing bare, white skeleton encroaching on the brown intact tissue. Photograph by Andy Bruckner, Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary; used with permission.
Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  By Aine C. Hawthorn, Michelle Dennis, Yasu Kiryu, Jan Landsberg, Esther Peters, and Thierry Work Chapter 1 of Section I, Other  Book 19, Wildlife Disease Case Definitions  Techniques and Methods 19–I1  U.S. Department of the Interior U.S. Geological Survey
U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia: 2024  For more information on the USGS—the Federal source for science about the Earth, its natural and living resources, natural hazards, and the environment—visit https://www.usgs.gov or call 1–888–392–8545. For an overview of USGS information products, including maps, imagery, and publications, visit https://store.usgs.gov/ or contact the store at 1–888–275–8747. Any use of trade, firm, or product names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. Although this information product, for the most part, is in the public domain, it also may contain copyrighted materials as noted in the text. Permission to reproduce copyrighted items must be secured from the copyright owner. Suggested citation: Hawthorn, A.C., Dennis, M., Kiryu, Y., Landsberg, J., Peters, E., and Work, T., 2024, Stony coral tissue loss disease (SCTLD) case definition for wildlife: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods, book 19, chap. I1, 20 p., https://doi.org/10.3133/tm19I1.  ISSN 2328-7055 (online)
iii Acknowledgments  We would like to thank the stony coral tissue loss disease histopathology subteam for the contribution of their time and collective expertise in the investigation and description of the microscopic characteristics of stony coral tissue loss disease.

v Contents  Acknowledgments ........................................................................................................................................iii Introduction.....................................................................................................................................................1 Scope of the Case Definition .......................................................................................................................1 Case Definition Criteria .................................................................................................................................2 Individual, Place, and Time Criteria for Diagnosis and Testing .....................................................2 Field Criteria for Diagnosis ..................................................................................................................2 Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis .......................................................................................................3 Laboratory Criteria Categorization ............................................................................................5 Supplemental Diagnostic Information ......................................................................................5 Epidemiologic Linkage Criteria for Diagnosis ..................................................................................5 Case Classification ......................................................................................................................................12 Quality Assurance Review Schedule .......................................................................................................15 Impact ............................................................................................................................................................15 References Cited..........................................................................................................................................15 Glossary .........................................................................................................................................................19  Figures  1.   Photographs showing gross appearance of stony coral tissue loss disease ....................3 2.   Photographs showing   Montastraea cavernosa   gross, subgross, and microscopic lesions .....................................................................................................................4 3.   Photographs showing   Dendrogyra cylindrus   gross and microscopic lesions ..................6 4.   Photographs showing   Orbicella faveolata   gross, subgross and microscopic lesions .....................................................................................................................7 5.   Photographs showing   Pseudodiploria strigosa   gross, subgross and microscopic lesions .....................................................................................................................8 6.   Photographs showing   Diploria labyrinthiformis   gross and microscopic lesions ..............9 7.   Photographs showing   Siderastrea siderea   subgross and microscopic lesions .............10 8.   Photographs showing   Colpophyllia natans   gross and microscopic lesions ....................11 9.   Photographs showing   Meandrina meandrites   subgross and microscopic lesions ........12 10.   Diagram showing case definition criteria add up to the case classifications .................13  Tables  1.   Case classification chart for stony coral tissue loss disease .............................................14  Abbreviation  SCTLD   stony coral tissue loss disease

Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  By Aine C. Hawthorn, 1   Michelle Dennis, 2   Yasu Kiryu, 3   Jan Landsberg, 3   Esther Peters, 4   and Thierry Work 1  Introduction  Diagnostic laboratories receive carcasses and samples for diagnostic evaluation and pathogen/toxin detection. The intent  of a case definition is to provide scientifically based criteria for determining (1) if an individual carcass has a specific disease and the confidence of that diagnosis; and (2) if a pathogen or  toxin is evident in a carcass or sample (for example, swab, tis- sue sample, skin scraping, blood/serum sample, environmental sample, or other). Using these criteria, cases diagnosed with  a specific disease (diagnosing disease) will be classified as “confirmed,” “presumptive,” or “suspected;” and evidence of  a pathogen or toxin (detecting pathogen/toxin) will be classi-  fied as “exposed” or “present/detected.” Classification is based on a combination of factors: individual, place, time, history,  clinical signs, diagnostic observations, and (or) diagnostic test  results. Case definitions bring clarity and consistency to the  evaluation process. Their use within and between organiza- tions allows more uniform reporting of diseases and etio- logic agents.  Case definitions are proposed for use in wildlife diag -  nostic laboratories and are not intended to replace regulatory standards provided by Government reporting agencies. Ideally, case definitions would be updated periodically as new infor - mation becomes available and new test methods are devel-  oped. Refer to the glossary for terminology definitions.  Disease/condition .—Stony coral tissue loss dis -  ease (SCTLD)  Pathogen/toxin etiologic agent(s) .—Unknown  Scope of the Case Definition  This case definition applies to several species of sclerac -  tinian corals across seven families: Family Faviidae (Gregory,  1900), including   Colpophyllia natans   (Houttuyn, 1772)  (boulder brain coral),   Diploria labyrinthiformis   (Linnaeus,  1 U.S. Geological Survey. 2University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine.  3 Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission.  4 George Mason University. 1758) (grooved brain coral),   Pseudodiploria clivosa   (Ellis  and Solander, 1786) (knobby brain coral), and   P. strigosa  (Dana, 1846) (symmetrical brain coral); Family Meandrinidae (Gray, 1847), including   Dendrogyra cylindrus   (Ehrenberg,  1834) (pillar coral),   Dichocoenia stokesii   (Milne-Edwards and Haime, 1848) (elliptical star coral),   Eusmilia fastigiata  (Pallas, 1766) (smooth flower coral), and   Meandrina jacksoni  (Weil and Pinzón, 2011) and   M. meandrites   (Linnaeus, 1758) (maze corals); Family Merulinidae (Verrill, 1866), including  Orbicella franksi   and   O. annularis   (Ellis and Solander, 1786)  (boulder star corals), and   O. faveolata   (Ellis and Solander,  1786) (mountainous star coral); Family Montastraeidae,  including   Montastraea cavernosa   (Linnaeus, 1767) (large- cup star coral); Family Astrocoeniidae (Koby, 1890), includ - ing   Stephanocoenia intersepta   (Lamarck, 1816) (blushing star coral); Family Scleractinia   incertae sedis , including  Solenastrea bournoni   (Milne-Edwards and Haime, 1850) (smooth star coral); and Family Siderastreidae (Vaughan  and Wells, 1943), including   Siderastrea siderea   (Ellis and  Solander, 1786) (starlet coral) and possibly   S. radians   (Pallas,  1766) (starlet coral), although samples of this species were not  collected ( FDEP, 2018 ,   Aeby and others, 2019 ).  Several other species are presumed susceptible, in Family Agariciidae (Gray, 1847), including   Helioseris cucullata   (Ellis  and Solander, 1786) (sunray lettuce coral),   Agaricia agaricites  (Linnaeus, 1758), and other   Agaricia   spp. (Lamarck, 1801) (lettuce and plate/saucer corals); Family Faviidae, including  Mycetophyllia   spp. (Milne-Edwards and Haime, 1848) (cactus  corals),   Scolymia   spp. (Haime, 1852) (disc corals),   Isophyllia  spp. (Milne-Edwards and Haime, 1851) (spinous cactus and  rough star corals), and   Mussa angulosa   (Pallas, 1766) (spiny flower coral); and Family Pocilloporidae (Gray, 1842), includ - ing   Madracis auretenra   (pencil coral) ( FDEP, 2018 ).  Of the tropical Western Atlantic scleractinian corals, members of the Family Poritidae (Gray, 1842), including  Porites astreoides   (Lamarck, 1816) (mustard hill coral), are considered to be of low susceptibility (Alvarez-Filip and oth -  ers, 2019; Meiling and others, 2020 ,   2021); and members of the Family Oculinidae (Gray, 1847) have not been observed  to be diseased during outbreaks. The acroporids   Acropora palmata   (Lamarck, 1816) (elkhorn coral) and   A. cervicornis  (Lamarck, 1816) (staghorn coral) are apparently not suscep - tible, nor are   Cladocora   spp. (Ehrenberg, 1834) (FDEP, 2018; Precht and others, 2016 ).
2   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife Case Definition Criteria  The case definition criteria are a concise summary of the current science regarding the clinical signs, history, gross and microscopic observations, and laboratory test results associ -  ated with a specific disease or pathogen. Various combinations of the criteria result in different case classifications represent -  ing the degree of certainty of the diagnosis.  Individual, Place, and Time Criteria for Diagnosis and Testing  Individual .—All ages and sizes of adult (sessile) coral are affected. Adult coral may be aged by annular rings in a man - ner like tree rings ( Buddemeier, 1976 ). No data are available  regarding larval stages. Larger colonies may survive longer and be therefore more likely to be observed, but larger size is not protective overall. Recently dead coral in an area experi -  encing an outbreak may be suspected as mortality caused by SCTLD (Aeby and others, 2019; Precht and others, 2016 ).  Place .—SCTLD has been documented along Florida’s Coral Reef (Florida Reef Tract) from Martin County south to Key West and now the Dry Tortugas (Muller and others, 2020; FDEP, 2018). Outbreaks of a disease with lesions grossly similar to SCTLD have also been confirmed in the Caribbean and Bahamas including Jamaica, Quintana Roo (Mexico), St. Maarten, St. Thomas, Dominican Republic, Turks and Caicos Islands, Saint-Martin, Belize, St. Eustatius, St. John, Puerto Rico, Grand Bahamas, Grand Cayman, United States and British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Guadeloupe, and St. Lucia (Dahlgren, 2020; Marks and Lang, 2018 ).  Honduras, Martinique, and Dominica were recently added to the Atlantic and Gulf Rapid Reef Assessment (AGRRA)  dashboard ( Kramer and others, 2019 ). Note that this disease  is continuing to spread through the wider Caribbean and will almost certainly be present in new areas as time passes. Active surveillance of Pacific reefs is important because the Panama Canal could present a conduit for SCTLD into the Pacific, and susceptibility of Pacific species is unknown.  Time .—The SCTLD outbreak was noted in 2014 and was associated with unusually high temperatures, outflow of semi-treated sewage, and a dredging event in Miami harbor  ( Miller and others, 2016 ), and the disease has been consis-  tently present in the Florida Reef Tract since that time. No clear pattern with respect to season has been identified (Aeby and others, 2019; Precht and others, 2016 ), but temperature increases have been associated with a decline in incidence and disease progression ( Meiling and others, 2021;   Williams and  others, 2021 ).  Field Criteria for Diagnosis  History and clinical signs .—Diagnostically compat -  ible illness may present with multifocal to coalescing sharply demarcated acute to subacute areas of tissue loss that may begin at the base of the colony and spread upwardly (apically) or appear randomly distributed. The area of tissue loss repre -  sented by bare skeleton may be bordered by a narrow band of bleached tissue but lacks any pigmented band at the tissue-loss margin. Skeleton at the tissue-loss margin is usually acute,  appearing white and intact (depending upon species), although algae and fungal mats denoting older, subacute, or chronic  lesions may accumulate on older areas of denuded skeleton. Rapid rate of tissue loss, 5 to 40 square centimeters per day (Sharp and Maxwell, 2018), is highly suspicious but not pathognomonic for SCTLD (Bruckner, 2016). Affected individuals typically die within weeks to months depending  on species ( FDEP, 2018). The presence of multiple affected species on a reef consistent with the previously observed sus -  ceptible species also increases suspicion, as do proportionally large areas of tissue loss relative to colony size. Species that are more highly susceptible including boulder brain coral, pil - lar coral, elliptical star coral, grooved brain coral, maze coral,  symmetrical brain coral, and knobby brain coral are typically affected first; and colonies may be discovered with complete mortality even on initial discovery. Species with intermediate susceptibility, including boulder star coral, mountainous star  coral, large-cup star coral, smooth star coral, blushing star coral, and starlet coral show signs on average 1 month later  and may die over months to years. Starlet coral is an excep -  tion and may show signs earlier, although progression may not  match other species ( FDEP 2018 ,   Aeby and others 2019 ).  Other .—In Florida and aquaria experiments, induc - tion of tissue loss appears to spread within the water column and through currents ( Muller and others 2020 ), although natural water currents cannot explain spread throughout  the Caribbean. Factors such as human activity and possible  pathogen(s) transmission via contaminated bilge water and  recreational or commercial equipment used in activities such as diving, boating, or fishing have all been suspected to play  a role ( Dahlgren, 2020 ). Because gross lesions alone are not  diagnostic, SCTLD cannot be ruled in or out of a particular site distant from other affected areas if it meets current gross criteria of the case definition (refer to the “Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis” section). In laboratory studies, apparently healthy coral species exposed to affected wild corals by direct contact or indirect  exposure developed the disease, so wild-collected coral are also a potential source of transmission ( Aeby and others, 2019 ). However, to date no evidence of infectious agents  consistently associated with SCTLD have been documented on light microscopy (Landsberg and others, 2020 ). Bacterial  causes have been hypothesized, but no bacteria have been found consistently associated with lesions. Virus-like particles have been observed within endosymbionts of both SCTLD
Case Definition Criteria   3  affected and apparently healthy exposed coral, causing lysis and death of affected Symbiodinium, but more data are needed to conclusively tie these to disease (Work and others, 2021 ).  Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis  Gross examination .—Diagnostically compatible find -  ings may include focal or multifocal to coalescing patches  of bleaching and tissue loss, or tissue loss beginning at the  base of the colony that may be bordered by a narrow band of  bleached tissue. For   S. siderea , initial lesions may be purple or gray discolored tissue around the oral cavity rather than white  denuded skeleton ( fig. 1 A ). More chronic areas of denuded  skeleton often develop a mat of fungal and (or) algal over- growth, whereas areas of acute loss abut white, bare skeleton ( Paul and others, 2019 ) ( fig. 1 B ).  Histopathology .—The histological presentation var-  ies among species, and many affected species have not been examined microscopically. However, of those that have been  examined ( n =8), commonalities are described in this document  and in ( Landsberg and others, 2020 ). The tissue loss margin is  often too autolyzed to be diagnostically useful, and apparently normal tissue on the affected colony distant from a lesion may be more diagnostic; therefore, biopsies should be taken from grossly normal areas of affected colonies as well as along the  tissue loss margin. Histologic lesions can be seen in tissue far  from the tissue loss margin in the coenenchyme or deeper in the polyp (fig. 2 D ).  A   B  EXPLANATION Shaped foci of brown discoloration Areas of normal tissue Areas of sediment deposition * * * * *   * * * *   * * * * n sd Bare intact skeleton is Dark brown intact tissue it Green, algae covered skeleton gs gs gs it it is is sd sd n n Multifocal acute tissue loss exemplified by bare intact white skeleton bordered by pale purple tissues  Figure 1.   Gross appearance of stony coral tissue loss disease. Photographs by Andy Bruckner, Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.   A ,   Siderastrea siderea   (starlet coral) showing multifocal to coalescing, variably sized and shaped foci of brown discoloration sharply demarcated from the adjacent normal tissue, and multifocal acute tissue loss exemplified by bare intact white skeleton bordered by pale purple tissues and areas of sediment deposition.   B ,   Colpophyllia natans   (boulder brain coral) with multifocal and basal tissue loss exposing bare, white skeleton encroaching on the brown intact tissue. Note narrow band of bare denuded intact skeleton separating dark brown intact tissues from green skeleton with overgrowth by turf algae indicative of a subacute tissue loss process and older mortality (Work and Aeby, 2006).
4   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  A   B C   D E   F  EXPLANATION Chronic tissue loss exemplified by diffuse areas of skeleton overgrowth by turf algae Bleached polyps * * * * * b b b Tissue loss margin tl tl tl Indistinct bleached border Tissue loss along septae Shrunken and misshapen algal symbionts Shrunken and misshapen algal symbionts Pale and uneven staining mesoglea next to an area of lycotic necrosis and misshapen algal symbionts Pale and uneven staining mesoglea next to an area of lycotic necrosis and misshapen algal symbionts Vacuolated algal symbionts Vacuolated algal symbionts Coenenchyme with lytic necrosis of gastrodermis in basal body wall and extending into surface body wall  Figure 2.   Montastraea cavernosa   gross, subgross, and microscopic lesions.   A , multifocal tissue loss; chronic tissue loss exemplified by diffuse areas of skeleton overgrowth by turf algae bordered by an indistinct bleached border and extending from the base of the colony.   B , bleached polyps near tissue loss margin. Photograph by Vanessa Brinkhuis, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   C , subgross of affected polyps showing tissue loss along septae. Photograph by Yasu Kiryu, FWC.   D , coenenchyme with lytic necrosis of gastrodermis in basal body wall and extending into surface body wall.   E , shrunken, misshapen and vacuolated algal symbionts.   F , pale, uneven staining mesoglea next to an area of lytic necrosis and misshapen algal symbionts.   D ,   E , and   F   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiru, FWC.
Case Definition Criteria   5  Histological lesions are first observed and most severe in the basal body wall of the gastrodermis and calicodermis, and center on the endosymbionts (Symbiodiniaceae) (figs. 3 B , 3 C ).  Endosymbionts show vacuolation, gray to brown discoloration and enlargement of the symbiosome (figs. 3 D , 4 D ,   5 D ), or fea-  tures of necrosis including deformation, cytoplasmic hypereo -  sinophilia or hypopigmentation, swelling or shrinkage, nuclear pyknosis, karyorrhexis, or pallor with nuclear loss (ghost  cells) ( figs. 6 D,   9 D ). In and around foci of affected algal symbionts, gastrodermis, especially at the basal body wall but also extending into the surface body wall, mesenteries, and cnidoglandular band, shows varying degrees of vacuolation attributed to increased mucocytes or cell swelling. There may also be characteristic discrete foci of lytic necrosis that have  loss of cell detail ( fig. 6 B ), disruption of tissue architecture,  loss of endosymbionts, support cell necrosis, and detachment  from the mesoglea (cleft formation) ( figs. 7 B ,   8 C ). The meso- glea is often eroded ( figs. 9 C,   9 D ), pale, and displays irregular  staining ( fig. 8 D,   9 D ). The calicodermis may be segmentally  cuboidal to columnar (metaplastic) or sloughing and necrotic ( figs. 8 B,   8 C ).  In large-cup star coral and symmetrical brain coral, rhomboidal, 1- to 10-micrometer intracytoplasmic Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive and eosinophilic inclusions, or crystalline inclusion bodies (CIBs; presumably within the cytoplasm of mucocytes), have been seen in the basal body wall gastrodermis, sometimes within or at the periphery of lesions (including degenerating mucocytes); however, these are not always seen, and they may also be present in appar -  ently healthy tissue (Landsberg and Kiryu, 2016; Landsberg and others, 2020). Basal body wall, calicodermis, and gas - trodermal lesions are often present in the absence of surface or epidermal lesions, and mesoglea next to foci of necrosis is often disrupted or expanded with clear space ( figs. 2 F ,   5 D ).  Histologic lesions may be seen in coral from an affected reef  that do not show gross signs of tissue loss.  Bacteria are not typically associated with lesions in hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections, but suspect bacteria in basal and surface body wall gastrodermis and cnidoglandular bands have been found using Giemsa, thionin, or Gram stains, some of which also bind to fluorophore-tagged eubacterial probes (EUB338-I, EUB338-II, EUB338-III) using onsite hybridization procedures (Esther Peters, George Mason Unversity, oral commun., 2020). Endolithic fungi or algae may be noted as are intracellular coccidia in the gastrodermis, but these are not a consistent feature, and their significance is  uncertain.  Diagnostic test(s) .—At present, the only diagnostic test to confirm SCTLD is light microscopy of paraffin embedded tissues stained with hematoxylin and eosin demonstrating the  characteristic lesions described above.  Laboratory Criteria Categorization  Laboratory confirmed .—Gross and microscopic lesions demonstrating morphology described in the “Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis” section.  Laboratory supportive .—Gross lesions compatible with SCTLD in a susceptible species, including high suspicion if other susceptible species on the same reef are also affected.  Exposed .—Not applicable.  Present/detected .—Not applicable.  Supplemental Diagnostic Information  Additional diagnostic comments .—None.  Notifiable/reportable disease .—Not applicable.  Epidemiologic Linkage Criteria for Diagnosis  An epidemiologic linkage can be established by close geographic and temporal proximity (in other words, part of the same mortality event) as one or more confirmed cases of SCTLD or at a site with a recent history of confirmed SCTLD with similar presentation as described in the “Case Definition Criteria” sections.
6   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  A   B C  Recently denuded lesion borders Shrunken and misshapen endosymbionts in an area of lytic necrosis EXPLANATION Lyctic necrosis of gastrodermis of basal body wall and mesenterial filaments of basal body wall of polyp deep in coralite charasteristic of stony coral tissue loss disease * *   * Multifocal to diffuse areas of acute to subacute tissue loss tl tl tl tl  Figure 3.   Dendrogyra cylindrus   gross and microscopic lesions.   A , multifocal to diffuse areas of acute to subacute tissue loss, some with narrow, white bleached indistinct, or recently denuded lesion borders. Photograph by Andy Bruckner, Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.   B,   lytic necrosis of gastrodermis of basal body wall and mesenterial filaments of basal body wall of polyp deep in corallite characteristic of stony coral tissue loss disease.   C , shrunken, misshapen endosymbionts in area of lytic necrosis.   B   and   C   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission.
Case Definition Criteria   7  A   B C   D  EXPLANATION Affected polyps with residual tissue Diffuse acute to subacute tissue loss tl   p Tissue loss within coenenchyme c p p c c c c c c p p   p p p p Normal tissue nt nt nt tl tl Lytic necrosis of gastrodermis and epidermis of surface body wall   Misshapen algal symbionts Misshapen algal symbionts Vacuolated algal symbionts Vacuolated algal symbionts  Figure 4.   Orbicella faveolata   gross, subgross and microscopic lesions.   A,   diffuse acute to subacute tissue loss with distinct to indistinct borders next to normal tissue (nt). Photograph by Vanessa Brinkhuis, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   B,   subgross of affected polyps showing tissue loss in coenenchyme and fragments of residual tissues interspersed with intact bare skeleton. Photograph by Yasu Kiryu, FWC.   C,   lytic necrosis of gastrodermis and epidermis of surface body wall.   D,   lytic necrosis with misshapen and vacuolated algal symbionts endosymbionts.   C   and   D   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.
8   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  EXPLANATION Diffuse acute tissue loss and bare intact skeleton tl   Shrunken and misshapen algal symbionts s Enlarged and fused symbiosomes e  A   B C   D  tl tl Smaller and newer focal lesion Smaller and newer focal lesion Pale and uneven staining mesoglea Pale and uneven staining mesoglea Lesion at tissue-loss margin showing tissue loss apparently starting in coenenchyme over septal ridges Lesion at tissue-loss margin showing tissue loss apparently starting in coenenchyme over septal ridges Lytic necrosis of surface body wall Lytic necrosis of surface body wall e e   e e s s s s Basal body wall and mesentery Basal body wall and mesentery  Figure 5.   Pseudodiploria strigosa   gross, subgross and microscopic lesions.   A,   diffuse acute tissue loss and bare intact skeleton with a smaller and newer focal lesion on the right. Photograph by Brian Reckinbeil, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   B,   subgross image of lesion at tissue-loss margin showing tissue loss apparently starting in coenenchyme over septal ridges. Photograph by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.   C,   lytic necrosis of gastrodermis of the basal body wall is expanded and distorted by severe vacuolations and lytic necrosis that extends entirely up one mesentery and into the body wall gastrodermis of surface body wall with disruption of the mesoglea and vacuolation of epidermis.   D,   affected algal symbionts are shrunken and misshapen with enlarged, fused symbiosomes and pale, uneven staining mesoglea.   C   and   D   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.
Case Definition Criteria   9  A   B C   D  Lytic necrosis in gastrodermis of surface body wall Lytic necrosis in gastrodermis of surface body wall Pale endosymbionts with loss of intercellular detail of pyrenoid and nuclei and irregular vacuolated mesoglea Pale endosymbionts with loss of intercellular detail of pyrenoid and nuclei and irregular vacuolated mesoglea Mucus cell swelling and rupture within mesentery Mucus cell swelling and rupture within mesentery Focal areas of tissue loss Focal areas of tissue loss  Figure 6.   Diploria labyrinthiformis   gross and microscopic lesions.   A,   focal areas of tissue loss. Photograph by Vanessa Brinkhuis, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   B,   mucus cell swelling and rupture within gastrodermis of basal body wall and mesentery.   C,   lytic necrosis in gastrodermis of surface body wall.   D,   higher magnification of area defined by box in   C   showing pale endosymbionts with loss of intercellular detail of pyrenoid and nuclei and irregular, vacuolated mesoglea.   B, C , and   D   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.
10   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  A   B C   D  Surface body wall gastrodermis with cleft formation between gastrodermis and mesoglea Surface body wall gastrodermis with cleft formation between gastrodermis and mesoglea Surface body wall with lytic necrosis of all layers Surface body wall with lytic necrosis of all layers Lytic necrosis with pyknotic and misshapen algal symbionts in area of extensive lytic necrosis Lytic necrosis with pyknotic and misshapen algal symbionts in area of extensive lytic necrosis EXPLANATION Bare intact skeleton s s s Bleaching of tissue b b b b b  Figure 7.   Siderastrea siderea   subgross and microscopic lesions.   A,   subgross image of polyps at tissue loss margin showing bare skeleton and bleaching of tissue, as indicated by a pale lavender hue. Photograph by Yasu Kiryu, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   B,   surface body wall gastrodermis with cleft formation between gastrodermis and mesoglea.   C,   surface body wall with lytic necrosis of all layers.   D,   lytic necrosis with pyknotic and misshapen algal symbionts in area of extensive lytic necrosis.   B, C,  and   D   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.
Case Definition Criteria   11  EXPLANATION Multifocal coalescing areas of subacute tissue loss exemplified by central areas of turf-algae covered skeleton ta   Bleached tissue bt Recently denuded skeleton rd Intact bare white skeleton s  A   B C   D  s s ta ta Gastrodermis with cleft formation Gastrodermis with cleft formation   Shrunken and misshapen hypereosinophilic algal symbionts with pyknotic nuclei Shrunken and misshapen hypereosinophilic algal symbionts with pyknotic nuclei Ghost symbiont Ghost symbiont Lytic necrosis of gastrodermis Lytic necrosis of gastrodermis Cleft formation Cleft formation bt bt rd rd  Figure 8.   Colpophyllia natans   gross and microscopic lesions.   A , multifocal coalescing areas of subacute tissue loss exemplified by central areas of turf-algae covered skeleton separated from intact tissues by a band of intact white bare skeleton. Photograph by Vanessa Brinkhuis, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   B,   subgross image of subacute lesion with white border indicating bleaching of tissue and recently denuded skeleton. Photograph by Vanessa Brinkhuis, FWC.   C,   gastrodermis with cleft formation and lytic necrosis.   D,   shrunken hypereosinophilic algal symbionts with pyknotic nuclei, ghost symbiont, and misshapen algal symbionts within enlarged symbiosomes.   C   and   D   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.
12   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife Case Classification  The sum of the criteria listed in the “Case Definition Criteria” sections (individual, place, time, field, laboratory,  and epidemiologic linkage criteria) associated with a particular disease or pathogen/toxin in an individual animal or specimen  add up to a case classification (fig. 10;   table 1).  Depending on the confidence in the results, cases of a specific disease will be classified as “confirmed,” “presump -  tive,” or “suspected;” and evidence of a pathogen or toxin will be classified as “exposed” or “present/detected” ( table 1 ; refer to glossary for definitions). A specific case classification may have more than one pathway to it. Not all classifications may be used for every disease. Although an epidemiological linkage may be present in all classifications, the “suspected” case classification requires compatible epidemiological link -  age criteria are met. Individual disease and pathogen specific  details are presented in table 1.  EXPLANATION Acute tissue loss with bare white skeleton s s Partially bleached tissue near margin m m  A   B C   D  Lytic necrosis of basal body wall Lytic necrosis of basal body wall Necrosis and sloughing of calicodermis Necrosis and sloughing of calicodermis Vacuolation of gastrodermis and enlarged and fused symbiosomes Vacuolation of gastrodermis and enlarged and fused symbiosomes Misshapen necrotic algal cells Misshapen necrotic algal cells Vacuolated distorted mesoglea Vacuolated distorted mesoglea  Figure 9.   Meandrina meandrites   subgross and microscopic lesions.   A , acute tissue loss with bare, white skeleton bordered by intact and partially bleached tissue near margin. Photograph by Katie Cummings, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC).   B,   lytic necrosis of basal body wall.   C,   magnification of box in   B   showing necrosis and sloughing of calicodermis, vacuolation of gastrodermis, and enlarged and fused symbiosomes.   D,   Misshapen, necrotic algal cells surrounded by vacuolated, distorted mesoglea.  B ,   C,   and   D   are paraffin embedded hematoxalin and eosin photomicrographs by Jan Landsberg and Yasu Kiryu, FWC.
Case Classification   13  Note .—The field and laboratory criteria in   table 1   reflect the typical presentation of SCTLD. The exact presentation in an individual animal or specimen may vary from what is  presented in table 1 but should still conform with the infor-  mation presented in the “Field Criteria for Diagnosis” and “Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis” sections.  rol23-0014_fig01  Individual, place, and time criteria Field criteria (if applicable) Laboratory criteria Epidemiological linkage criteria Classification +   +   = +  Figure 10.   Case definition criteria add up to the case classifications. From Miller and others (2024).
14   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife Table 1.   Case classification chart for stony coral tissue loss disease.  [The suspected, exposed, and present/detected case classifications do not apply to this case definition]  Individual, place, and time criteria   Field criteria (if available)   Laboratory criteria   Epidemiological linkage criteria   Classification  Scleractinian coral of  susceptible species; within Florida’s  coral reef, Bahamas,  or Caribbean; any  time  Multifocal coalescing apical, central and/  or basal tissue loss with or without a bleached border, progressing at a rate  equal to or greater than 4 square cen -  timeters per day in highly susceptible species or with relatively large areas  of bare white skeleton consistent with rapid tissue loss  Meets laboratory confirmed criteria:  Gross examination .—Bleaching and tissue loss or discolored tissue. Possible fungal or algal overgrowth of denuded skeleton (chronic), bare skeleton (acute)  and  Histopathology .—Species variation. Lytic necrosis of  gastrodermis associated with zooxanthellar vacuolation,  necrosis, and degeneration with enlarged symbiosomes, with or without eosinophilic inclusions or crystalline  inclusion bodies  and  Diagnostic test(s) .—Characteristic lesions on histopathol -  ogy (tissues stained with hematoxylin and eosin) Optional: Many in - dividuals on a reef  are affected and are epidemiologically  linked  Confirmed  Scleractinian coral of  susceptible species; within Florida’s  coral reef, Bahamas,  or Caribbean; any  time  Multifocal coalescing apical, central and/  or basal tissue loss with or without a bleached border, progressing at a rate  equal to or greater than 4 square cen -  timeters per day in highly susceptible species or with relatively large areas  of bare white skeleton consistent with rapid tissue loss  Meets laboratory supportive criteria:  Gross examination .—Lesions compatible with SCTLD  in a susceptible species, with high suspicion if other  susceptible species on the same reef are also affected and nonsusceptible species are unaffected.  and  Histopathology .— None  and  Diagnostic test(s) .— Not applicable  Optional: Many in - dividuals on a reef  are affected and are epidemiologically  linked Presumptive
References Cited   15 Quality Assurance Review Schedule  The authors plan to review this case definition periodi -  cally to incorporate new scientific information and test meth - ods as needed.  Planned date for next review .—June 1, 2025  Schedule .—June 2025 and then every 3–5 years—or sooner if science about SCTLD changes substantially.  Impact  Applying case definitions in diagnostic, surveillance, and research efforts can help standardize data, making it easier to understand and analyze within and between diagnosticians and laboratories. Laboratories are encouraged to store the case classification assigned to each specimen or sample in their data system so that it can be readily and reliably retrievable.  References Cited  Aeby, G.S., Ushijima, B., Campbell, J.E., Jones, S., Williams, G.J., Meyer, J.L., Häse, C., and Paul, V.J., 2019, Pathogenesis of a tissue loss disease affecting multiple  species of corals along the Florida Reef Tract: Frontiers in  Marine Science, v. 6, 18 p. [Also available at   https://doi.org/  10.3389/ fmars.2019.00678.] Alvarez-Filip, L., Estrada-Salvidar, N., Perez-Cervantes, E., Molina-Hernandez, A., and Gonzalez-Barrios, F.J., 2019, A rapid spread of the stony coral tissue loss disease outbreak in the Mexican Caribbean: PeerJ, v. 7, e8096. [Also avail - able at   https://doi.org/10.7717/ peerj.8069.] Bruckner, A.W., 2016, White syndromes of Atlantic reef- building corals, chap. 22   of   Woodley, C.M., Downs, C.A, Bruckner, A.W., Porter, J.W., and Galloway, S.B., eds., Diseases of coral: Hoboken, N.Y., Wiley Blackwell, p. 316–329. Buddemeier, R.W., 1976, Coral growth: Oceanography and Marine Biology—An Annual Review, v. 14, p. 183–225. Dahlgren, C., 2020, Rapid assessment of the occurrence of Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) along the south -  ern coast of Grand Bahama, Bahamas: Perry Institute for Marine Science, March 16, 2020, 11 p. FDEP, 2018, Case definition—Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD): Florida Disease and Epidemiology Team, accessed August 5, 2020, at htt ps://flori dadep.gov/ rcp/ coral/documents/stony- coral-tissue-loss- disease-sctld- case-definition .  Kramer, P.R., Roth, L., and Lang, J., 2019, Map  of stony coral tissue loss disease outbreak in the Caribbean: Atlantic and Gulf Rapid Reef Assessment digital data, accessed August 5, 2021, ht tps://www.agrra.org/ coral-disease- outbreak/.  Landsberg, J.H., and Kiryu, Y., 2016, 2016 coral disease epi -  zootic (update II): Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, accessed August 2020 at https://flori dadep.gov/rcp/rcp/documents/2016- coral-disease-epizootic .  Landsberg, J.H., Kiryu, Y., Peters, E.C., Wilson, P.W., Perry, N., Waters, Y., Maxwell, K.E., Huebner, L.K., and Work, T.M., 2020, Stony coral tissue loss disease in Florida is associated with disruption of host–zooxanthellae physiol -  ogy: Frontiers in Marine Science, v. 7, no. 1090, 24 p. [Also  available at   https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmars.2020.576013.] Marks, K.W., and Lang, J.C., 2018, AGARRA database and summary products (ver. 2018-03): Atlantic and Gulf Rapid Reef Assessment digital data, accessed December 2020  at   h ttp://www.agrra.org/data-explorer/explore- summary-  products/.  Meiling, S., Muller, E.M., Smith, T.B., and Brandt, M.E., 2020, 3D photogrammetry reveals dynamics of stony coral tissue loss disease (SCTLD) lesion progression across a thermal stress event: Frontiers in Marine Science, v. 7, 12 p. [Also available at https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmars.2020.597643.] Meiling, S.S., Muller, E.M., Lasseigne, D., Rossin, A., Veglia, A.J., MacKnight, N., Dimos, B., Huntley, N., Correa, A.M.S., Smith, T.B., Holstein, D.M., Mydlarz, L.D., Apprill, A., and Brandt, M.E., 2021, Variable species responses to experimental stony coral tissue loss disease (SCTLD) exposure: Frontiers in Marine Science, v. 8, no. 464, 12 p. [Also available at https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmars.2021.670829.] Miller, M.W., Karazsia, J., Groves, C.E., Griffin, S., Moore, T., Wilber, P., and Gregg, K., 2016, Detecting sedimentation  impacts to coral reefs resulting from dredging the Port of  Miami, Florida USA: PeerJ, v. 4, p. e2711. [Also available  at   https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.2711.] Miller, K.J.G., Parmley, E.J., Ballmann, A., Buckner, J., Jones, M., Lankton, J.S., Zimmer, M., and Lankau, E., 2024, [Disease/condition] case definition [template] for wildlife: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods, book 19, chap. A1, 8 p., https://doi.org/10.3133/ tm19A1 .  Muller, E.M., Sartor, C., Alcaraz, N.I., and van Woesik, R., 2020, Spatial epidemiology of the stony-coral-tissue- loss disease in Florida: Frontiers in Marine Science, v. 7, 11 p. [Also available at https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmars.2020.00163.]
16   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife  Paul, V.J., Ushijima, B., and Aeby, G., 2019, Studies of the ecology and microbiology of Florida’s coral tissue loss  diseases: Florida Department of Environmental Protection,  completed in fulfillment of order no. B3B171, 33 p. Precht, W.F., Gintert, B.E., Robbart, M.L., Fura, R., and Van Woesik, R., 2016, Unprecedented disease-related coral mor -  tality in southeastern Florida: Scientific Reports, v. 6, no. 1, 11 p. [Also available at https://doi.org/10.1038/ srep31374.] Sharp, W., and Maxwell, K., 2018, Investigating the ongo -  ing coral disease outbreak in the Florida Keys—Collecting  corals to diagnose the etiological agent(s) and establishing sentinel sites to monitor transmission rates and the spa- tial progression of the disease: Florida Fish and Wildlife  Conservation Commission, 26 p. Williams, S.D., Walter, C.S. and Muller, E.M., 2021, Fine scale temporal and spatial dynamics of the stony coral tis -  sue loss disease outbreak within the lower Florida Keys: Frontiers in Marine Science, April 2021. Work, T.M., and Aeby, G.S., 2006, Systematically describ -  ing gross lesions in corals: Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, v. 70, p. 155–160. [Also available at   https://www.int-  res.com/articles/dao2006/ 70/d070p155.pdf.] Work, T.M., Weatherby, T.M., Landsberg, J.H., Kiryu, Y., Cook, S.M., and Peters, E.C., 2021, Viral-like particles are associated with endosymbiont pathology in Florida cor -  als affected by stony coral tissue loss disease: Frontiers in Marine Science, v. 8, 18 p. [Also available at   https://doi.org/  10.3389/ fmars.2021.750658.]


Glossary   19 Glossary additional diagnostic comments   Any additional diagnostic notes pertinent to recording/reporting (for example, requests for strain/serovar/variant reporting, inconclusive/ ambiguous results, or “not applicable”).  case classification   The sum of the factors in the “Case Definition Criteria” sections of the case definition including individual (for example, species, age group), place, time, history, clinical signs, diagnostic observations, and (or) diagnostic test results, associated with a particular disease or pathogen/toxin in an individual animal or specimen. Depending on the confidence in the results, cases of a specific disease will be classified as “confirmed,” “presumptive,” or “suspected;” and a pathogen or toxin will be classified as “exposed” or “present/detected.”  case definition   A consistently applied, scientifically based and clearly defined set of field, gross, histopathology, laboratory, or epidemiologic criteria used to classify an individual animal or sample to a specific disease or pathogen/toxin for surveillance or outbreak reporting purposes (based on the combination of the criteria and confidence in the results).  confirmed case   The combination of individual (for example, species, age group), place, time, history, clinical signs, and laboratory criteria for diagnosis with the highest level of certainty for accepted diagnostic testing as stated in the case definition. Example: Cardinal with clinical signs, gross and microscopic lesions compatible with salmonellosis, and positive bacterial culture for   Salmonella enterica enterica   in the liver.  diagnostic test(s)   Laboratory tests typically used to determine this diagnosis or detect the pathogen/toxin; for example, bacterial culture.  diagnostically compatible   An animal that meets the individual (for example, species, age group), place, time, field, and laboratory criteria for a particular disease as stated in the case definition.  disease   Any disorder of structure or function that may produce specific clinical signs; disease can be infectious or noninfectious.  disease agent   Any pathogen, toxin, or other known cause of disease.  epidemiologically linked   A case that has temporal, geographic, or other relevant linkages to one or more confirmed cases as described under “Epidemiologic Linkage Criteria for Diagnosis” in the case definition.  exposed   Detection of a toxin in tissues or body fluids at a concentration above acceptable background levels but below the documented lethal threshold level for the species. This may apply to a toxin detected in the absence of documented lethal threshold levels. This category can also include serological evidence of infection in the absence of other information such as organism detection or disease diagnosis.  gross examination   Gross necropsy observations in a carcass or sample that are diagnostically compatible with disease.  histopathology   General microscopic observations in a carcass or sample that are diagnostically compatible with disease.  history and clinical signs   Field observations and changes in behavior, appearance, or abilities in live animals/populations that are diagnostically compatible with disease. Photograph or video evidence may be used when appropriate.  individual   The common age groups, species, or other characteristics that increase disease or pathogen/toxin suspicion.  laboratory confirmed   The strongest degree of assurance in identification of a disease agent of interest and evidence of the associated disease based on one or more accepted laboratory methods. A test or combination of methods that has been scientifically accepted as definitive for a particular disease agent and the associated disease. Example: Positive bacterial isolation for salmonella plus compatible gross and histologic lesions for salmonellosis.
20   Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) Case Definition for Wildlife laboratory criteria for diagnosis   The gross, microscopic, molecular, culture, analytical or other laboratory test criteria used to determine the presence of a specific disease agent and evidence of the disease itself. These are categorized based on the validity and performance of the test(s). Categories are “laboratory confirmed,” “laboratory supportive,” “exposed,” and “present/ detected.” Where possible, references for the current accepted science for a given disease and pathogen are provided in the case definition. For some select new or emerging diseases the laboratory criteria may be based on the collective expertise of pathologists at the U.S. Geological Survey National Wildlife Health Center and the Canadian Wildlife Disease Cooperative or other institutions.  laboratory supportive   Laboratory results that are less than definitive for a specific disease agent and the associated disease. A test or combination or methods whose results support the diagnosis or a particular disease but are not considered definitive; for example, a screening test. Test result interpretation may be based on the tissue tested (for example, culture of amphibian skin surface versus internal tissue) or postmortem condition of the sample. Example: Gross and histologic lesions compatible with salmonellosis (without laboratory testing).  notifiable/reportable disease   A disease or pathogen that by law must be disclosed to State, Provincial, and (or) Federal agricultural or public health authorities.  other (field criteria)   Additional pertinent comments about presentation (for example, potential for carrier status).  place   Locations and other geographic features that increase disease or pathogen/ toxin suspicion.  present/detected   Laboratory detection of a potentially pathogenic agent in the absence of findings diagnostically compatible with the associated disease. Often used when tracking a known or suspected asymptomatic carrier state (for example,   Salmonella   or duck virus enteritis) or when documenting detection of an agent that is of increased diagnostic or epidemiologic interest, even in the absence of evidence of illness (for example, new or emerging disease or syndrome).  presumptive case   The combination of individual (for example, species, age group), place, time, history, clinical signs and laboratory criteria for diagnosis that has a moderate degree of certainty as stated in the case definition. This uncertainty may be due to the test performed, postmortem decomposition of the carcass affecting observation or interpretation of gross and or histopathologic lesions, inadequate sample for testing due to scavenging or carcass size, inconclusive test results, or lack of a definitive diagnostic test. Enough information is available to conclude the disease is most likely present but not enough information available to conclude the disease is definitively present. Example: Raccoon with compatible histologic lesions for parvovirus without additional laboratory test results.  scope   Indicates what species, when and (or) where this protocol applies; for example, specifics regarding the disease agent, animal class, sex, age group, location, season, antemortem or postmortem sample collection, environmental samples, and so on.  suspected case   This is primarily based on a combination of individual, place, time, minimal or nonspecific field and laboratory information and a geographic and temporal (epidemiologic) connection to a confirmed case. Not enough information is available to meet the threshold in the case definition for a confirmed or presumptive case, but the diagnosis can reasonably be inferred by the close association with confirmed cases of a particular disease in other animals collected from the same general location and time. Example: A specimen with a geographic or temporal link to a confirmed case of a disease that is not tested but was examined and may have nonspecific gross or histopathologic findings that are compatible with that disease.  time   The season(s), months, or other temporal factors that increase disease or pathogen/toxin suspicion.  wildlife   Free ranging vertebrate species (mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish).
For more information about this publication, contact: Director, USGS National Wildlife Health Center 6006 Schroeder Road Madison, WI 53711 For additional information, visit: https://www.usgs.gov/centers/nwhc Publishing support provided by the Rolla Publishing Service Center